<p>
  Updating a Qlustar cluster is a multi-step process. The detailed steps depend on whether the
  update involves a kernel update or not (the release notes will mention it, if a new kernel is
  part of the update) and what module versions you have selected for your images. We'll explain
  the differences below. Follow the steps in the following order.
</p>
<h2>Updating the head-node(s)</h2>
<p>
  Apply the standard Debian procedure to update the head-node(s) installation. Execute as root:
</p>
<pre>
  $ aptitude update
  $ aptitude dist-upgrade
</pre>
<p>
  This will update all packages. In most cases, if new versions of the Qlustar image module
  packages are available, this will also automatically rebuild the images defined in QluMan. We
  elaborate on this <a href="#Image-Update">below</a>.
</p>
<p>
  If the kernel was updated by this process reboot the head-node(s) after executing the above
  commands, otherwise you're done with this step.
</p>
<h2>Updating the chroot(s)</h2>
<p>
  This is also a standard Debian upgrade as explained in the <a
  href="/book/docs/first-steps#Adding-Software" target="_blank"> First Steps Guide</a>. If you
  have setup multiple chroots, you'll have to update all of them.
</p>
<h2>Updating the nodes</h2>
<p>
  If the update contains a new kernel, reboot all nodes. In case you have some storage nodes
  that export a global file-system (e.g. NFS or Lustre), reboot them first, then all the other
  nodes.
</p>
<p>
  If the update doesn't contain a new kernel, you have the choice of either rebooting the nodes
  like above or using the <strong>Qlustar online update mechanism</strong> (currently the
  online update has to be executed manually, future versions of QluMan will allow to do this
  from the GUI) as follows. Execute the following command on the head-node for each node (of
  course, this can be done in a shell <em>for loop</em>):
</p>
<pre>
  $ qlustar-image-update -u &lt;image name&gt; &lt;hostname&gt;
</pre>
<p>
  where &lt;image name&gt; has to be the name of the image that is currently booted on the
  corresponding node. You also have the option to first check what exactly the update will
  change. To find out, execute the following for one sample node per image type:
</p>
<pre>
  $ qlustar-image-update -c &lt;image name&gt; &lt;hostname&gt;
</pre>
<p>
  This will show the files that will be changed by this update.
</p>
<pre>
  $ qlustar-image-update -s &lt;image name&gt; &lt;hostname&gt;
</pre>
<p>
  This will show all services (daemons) that need to be restarted as a result of this update.
</p>
<h3 id="Image-Update">When will images be updated/rebuilt?</h3>
<p>
  There are a couple of cases to distinguish, depending on what version is selected for an
  image in QluMan (see also the corresponding section in the <a
  href="/book/docs/qluman-guide#Image-Versioning" target="_blank"> QluMan Guide</a>).
</p>
<ol>
  <li> Selected image version is of <strong>type x.y.z</strong>,<br/> e.g. 8.1.1. In this case,
  the image will be rebuilt if and only if there is an update for the selected version (8.1.1)
  of the modules. Such updates will always be bug-/security-fixes.
  </li>
  <li> Selected image version is of <strong>type x.y</strong>,<br/> e.g. 8.1 with 8.1.1 being
  the most recent 8.1.z version before applying the update. In this case the image is rebuilt,
  if the update entails a new maintenance release (e.g. 8.1.2 which will then become the new
  real image version) or an update for the currently installed (8.1.1) modules.
  </li>
  <li> Selected image version is of <strong>type x</strong>,,<br/> e.g. 8 with 8.1 being the
  most recent 8.y and 8.1.1 being the most recent 8.1.z version before applying the update. In
  this case the image is rebuilt, if either the update entails a new feature release (e.g. 8.2,
  the latest 8.2.z will then become the new real image version) or a new maintenance release
  (e.g. 8.1.2 which will then become the new real image version) or an update for the currently
  installed (8.1.1) modules. With this option, manual intervention to obtain a new image
  version is only necessary when upgrading to a new major release (e.g. 9.y.z).
  </li>
</ol>
<!--Fictive end_tag--></body></html>
